The Project Gutenberg eBook of A history of land mammals in the Western Hemisphere
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A history of land mammals in the Western Hemisphere

Author: William Berryman Scott

Release date: January 14, 2025 [eBook #75110]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The MacMillan Company, 1913

Credits: Peter Becker and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF LAND MAMMALS IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE ***






           A HISTORY OF LAND MAMMALS IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE

                              [Illustration]

                          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                   NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO · DALLAS
                         ATLANTA · SAN FRANCISCO

                         MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED
                        LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA
                                MELBOURNE

                    THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
                                 TORONTO




[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE.—A Pleistocene tar-pool in southern
California: †Giant Wolves (_Canis †dirus_) and †Sabre-tooth Tiger
(_†Smilodon californicus_) on the carcass of an elephant (_Elephas
†columbi_). The elephant is hairless, as may have been true of the
southern race.]




                                    A
                         HISTORY OF LAND MAMMALS
                                  IN THE
                            WESTERN HEMISPHERE

                                    BY
                             WILLIAM B. SCOTT
     PH.D. (Heidelberg), HON.D.SC. (Harvard & Oxford), LL.D. (Univ.
                            of Pennsylvania)

               BLAIR PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY AND PALÆONTOLOGY
                         IN PRINCETON UNIVERSITY

          _ILLUSTRATED WITH 32 PLATES AND MORE THAN 100 DRAWINGS
                            BY BRUCE HORSFALL_

                                 New York
                          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                                   1913

                          _All rights reserved_

                             COPYRIGHT, 1913,
                        BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

            Set up and electrotyped. Published November, 1913.

                              Norwood Press
                  J. S. Cushing Co.—Berwick & Smith Co.
                          Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




Dedicated

TO

MY CLASSMATES

HENRY FAIRFIELD OSBORN AND FRANCIS SPEIR

IN MEMORY OF A NOTABLE SUMMER AFTERNOON IN 1876 AND IN TOKEN OF FORTY
YEARS’ UNCLOUDED FRIENDSHIP




    Speak to the earth and it shall teach thee.

                                                       —JOB, xii, 8.

    Can these bones live?

                                                —EZEKIEL, xxxvii, 3.




PREFACE


One afternoon in June, 1876, three Princeton undergraduates were lying
under the trees on the canal bank, making a languid pretence of preparing
for an examination. Suddenly, one of the trio remarked: “I have been
reading an old magazine article which describes a fossil-collecting
expedition in the West; why can’t we get up something of the kind?” The
others replied, as with one voice, “We can; let’s do it.” This seemingly
idle talk was, for Osborn and myself, a momentous one, for it completely
changed the careers which, as we then believed, had been mapped out for
us. The random suggestion led directly to the first of the Princeton
palæontological expeditions, that of 1877, which took us to the “Bad
Lands” of the Bridger region in southwestern Wyoming. The fascination of
discovering and exhuming with our own hands the remains of the curious
creatures which once inhabited North America, but became extinct ages
ago, has proved an enduring delight. It was the wish to extend something
of this fascinating interest to a wider circle, that occasioned the
preparation of this book.

The western portion of North America has preserved a marvellous series
of records of the successive assemblages of animals which once dwelt
in this continent, and in southernmost South America an almost equally
complete record was made of the strange animals of that region. For
the last half-century, or more, many workers have coöperated to bring
this long-vanished world to light and to decipher and interpret the
wonderful story of mammalian development in the western hemisphere. The
task of making this history intelligible, not to say interesting, to the
layman, has been one of formidable difficulty, for it is recorded in
the successive modifications of the bones and teeth, and without some
knowledge of osteology, these records are in an unknown tongue. To meet
this need, Chapter III gives a sketch of the mammalian skeleton and
dentition, which the reader may use as the schoolboy uses a vocabulary
to translate his Latin exercise, referring to it from time to time, as
may be necessary to make clear the descriptions of the various mammalian
groups. Technical terms have been avoided as far as possible, but,
unfortunately, it is not practicable to dispense with them altogether.
The appended glossary will, it is hoped, minimize the inconvenience.

No one who has not examined it, can form any conception of the enormous
mass and variety of material, illustrating the history of American
mammals, which has already been gathered into the various museums. A full
account of this material would require many volumes, and one of the chief
problems in the preparation of this book has been that of making a proper
selection of the most instructive and illuminating portions of the long
and complicated story. Indeed, so rapid is the uninterrupted course of
discovery, that parts of the text became antiquated while in the press
and had to be rewritten. As first prepared, the work proved to be far
too long and it was necessary to excise several chapters, for it seemed
better to cover less ground than to make the entire history hurried and
superficial. The plan of treatment adopted involves a considerable amount
of repetition, but this is perhaps not a disadvantage, since the same
facts are considered from different points of view.

The facts which are here brought together have been ascertained by
many workers, and I have borrowed with the greatest freedom from my
fellow labourers in the field of palæontology. As every compiler of a
manual finds, it is not feasible to attribute the proper credit to each
discoverer. Huxley has so well explained the situation in the preface to
his “Anatomy of Vertebrated Animals,” that I may be permitted to borrow
his words: “I have intentionally refrained from burdening the text with
references; and, therefore, the reader, while he is justly entitled to
hold me responsible for any errors he may detect, will do well to give me
no credit for what may seem original, unless his knowledge is sufficient
to render him a competent judge on that head.”

A book of this character is obviously not the proper place for polemical
discussions of disputed questions. Whenever, therefore, the views
expressed differ widely from those maintained by other palæontologists,
I have attempted no more than to state, as fairly as I could, the
alternative interpretations and my own choice between them. Any other
course was forbidden by the limitations of space.

It is a pleasure to give expression to my sincere sense of gratitude
to the many friends who have helped me in an unusually laborious
undertaking. Professor Osborn and Dr. Matthew have placed at my disposal
the wonderful treasures of the American Museum of Natural History in New
York and in the most liberal manner have supplied me with photographs and
specimens for drawings, as well as with information regarding important
discoveries which have not yet been published. Dr. W. J. Holland,
Director of the Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh, has likewise generously
provided many photographs from the noble collection under his charge,
kindly permitting the use of material still undescribed. To Professor
Charles Schuchert, of Yale University, I am also indebted for several
photographs.

The figures of existing animals are almost all from photographs taken
in the New York and London zoölogical gardens, and I desire to thank
Director Hornaday, of the Bronx Park, and Mr. Peacock, of the London
garden, for the very kind manner in which they have procured these
illustrations for my use. The photographs have been modified by painting
out the backgrounds of cages, houses, and the like, so as to give a less
artificial appearance to the surroundings.

To my colleagues at Princeton I am under great obligations for much
valuable counsel and assistance. Professor Gilbert van Ingen has prepared
the maps and diagrams and Dr. W. J. Sinclair has devoted much labour
and care to the illustrations and has also read the proofs. Both of
these friends, as also Professors C. H. Smyth and E. G. Conklin and Drs.
Farr and McComas, have read various parts of the manuscript and made
many helpful suggestions in dealing with the problems of treatment and
presentation.

For thirteen years past I have been engaged in the study of the great
collections of fossil mammals, gathered in Patagonia by the lamented Mr.
Hatcher and his colleague, Mr. Peterson, now of the Carnegie Museum.
This work made it necessary for me to visit the museums of the Argentine
Republic, which I did in 1901, and was there received with the greatest
courtesy and kindness by Dr. F. Moreno, Director, and Dr. Santiago Roth,
of the La Plata Museum, and Dr. F. Ameghino, subsequently Director of the
National Museum at Buenos Aires. To all of these gentlemen the chapters
on the ancient life of South America are much indebted, especially to
Dr. Ameghino, whose untimely death was a great loss to science. It is
earnestly to be hoped that the heroic story of his scientific career may
soon be given to the world.

Finally, I desire to thank Mr. Horsfall for the infinite pains and care
which he has expended upon the illustrations for the work, to which so
very large a part of its value is due.

While the book is primarily intended for the lay reader, I cannot but
hope that it may also be of service to many zoölogists, who have been
unable to keep abreast of the flood of palæontological discovery and yet
wish to learn something of its more significant results. How far I have
succeeded in a most difficult task must be left to the judgment of such
readers.

    PRINCETON, N.J., June 1, 1913.




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

                                CHAPTER I

  METHODS OF INVESTIGATION—GEOLOGICAL                                    1

                               CHAPTER II

  METHODS OF INVESTIGATION—PALÆONTOLOGICAL                              29

                               CHAPTER III

  THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE MAMMALIA                                    50

                               CHAPTER IV

  THE SKELETON AND TEETH OF MAMMALS                                     61

                                CHAPTER V

  THE GEOGRAPHICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE AMERICAS IN CENOZOIC TIMES        99

                               CHAPTER VI

  THE GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF MAMMALS                             135

                               CHAPTER VII

  THE SUCCESSIVE MAMMALIAN FAUNAS OF NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA           192

                              CHAPTER VIII

  HISTORY OF THE PERISSODACTYLA                                        288

                               CHAPTER IX

  HISTORY OF THE ARTIODACTYLA                                          358

                                CHAPTER X

  HISTORY OF THE PROBOSCIDEA                                           422

                               CHAPTER XI

  HISTORY OF THE †AMBLYPODA AND †CONDYLARTHRA                          443

                               CHAPTER XII

  HISTORY OF THE †TOXODONTIA (OR †NOTOUNGULATA)                        461

                              CHAPTER XIII

  HISTORY OF THE †LITOPTERNA AND †ASTRAPOTHERIA                        489

                               CHAPTER XIV

  HISTORY OF THE CARNIVORA                                             516

                               CHAPTER XV

  HISTORY OF THE PRIMATES                                              577

                               CHAPTER XVI

  HISTORY OF THE EDENTATA                                              589

                              CHAPTER XVII

  HISTORY OF THE MARSUPIALIA                                           624

                              CHAPTER XVIII

  MODES OF MAMMALIAN EVOLUTION                                         645

  GLOSSARY                                                             665

  INDEX                                                                675




A HISTORY OF LAND MAMMALS IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE




CHAPTER I

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION—GEOLOGICAL


The term _Mammal_ has no exact equivalent in the true vernacular of
any modern language, the word itself, like its equivalents, the French
_Mammifère_ and the German _Säugethier_, being entirely artificial. As
a name for the class Linnæus adopted the term Mammalia, which he formed
from the Latin _mamma_ (_i.e._ teat) to designate those animals which
suckle their young; hence the abbreviated form Mammal, which has been
naturalized as an English word. “Beast,” as employed in the Bible, and
“Quadruped” are not quite the same as mammal, for they do not include the
marine forms, such as whales, dolphins, seals, walruses, or the flying
bats, and they are habitually used in contradistinction to Man, though
Man and all the forms mentioned are unquestionably mammals.

In attempting to frame a definition of the term _Mammal_, it is
impossible to avoid technicalities altogether, for it is the complete
unity of plan and structure which justifies the inclusion of all the
many forms that differ so widely in habits and appearance. _Mammals are
air-breathing vertebrates, which are warm-blooded and have a 4-chambered
heart; the body cavity is divided into pleural and abdominal chambers
by a diaphragm; except in the lowest division of the class, the young
are brought forth alive and are always suckled, the milk glands being
universal throughout the class. In the great majority of mammals the
body is clothed with hair; a character found in no other animals. In
a few mammals the skin is naked, and in still fewer there is a partial
covering of scales._ The list of characters common to all mammals, which
distinguish them from other animals, might be indefinitely extended,
for it includes all the organs and tissues of the body, the skeletal,
muscular, digestive, nervous, circulatory, and reproductive systems, but
the two or three more obvious or significant features above selected will
suffice for the purposes of definition.

While the structural plan is the same throughout the entire class,
there is among mammals a wonderful variety of form, size, appearance,
and adaptation to special habits. It is as though a musician had taken
a single theme and developed it into endless variations, preserving
an unmistakable unity through all the changes. Most mammals are
_terrestrial_, living, that is to say, not only on the land, but on the
ground, and are herbivorous in habit, subsisting chiefly or exclusively
upon vegetable substances, but there are many departures from this mode
of life. It should be explained, however, that the term _terrestrial_ is
frequently used in a more comprehensive sense for all land mammals, as
distinguished from those that are aquatic or marine. Monkeys, Squirrels,
Sloths and Opossums are examples of the numerous _arboreal_ mammals,
whose structure is modified to fit them for living and sleeping in the
trees, and in some, such as the Sloths, the modification is carried so
far that the creature is almost helpless on the ground. Another mode of
existence is the burrowing or _fossorial_, the animal living partly or
mostly, or even entirely underground, a typical instance of which is the
Mole. The Beaver, Muskrat and Otter, to mention only a few forms, are
_aquatic_ and spend most of their life in fresh waters, though perfectly
able to move about on the land. _Marine_ mammals, such as the Seals and
Whales, have a greatly modified structure which adapts them to life in
the sea.

Within the limits of each of these categories we may note that there
are many degrees of specialization or adaptation to particular modes of
life. Thus, for example, among the marine mammals, the Whales and their
allies, Porpoises, etc., are so completely adapted to a life in the
seas that they cannot come upon the land, and even stranding is fatal
to them, while the Seals frequently land and move about upon the shore.
It should further be observed that mammals of the most diverse groups
are adapted to similar modes of existence. Thus in one natural group or
_order_ of related forms, occur terrestrial, burrowing, arboreal and
aquatic members, and the converse statement is of course equally true,
that animals of similar life-habits are not necessarily related to one
another, and very frequently, in fact, are not so related. Among the
typically marine mammals, for example, there are at least three and
probably four distinct series, which have independently become adapted to
life in the sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before attempting to set forth an outline of what has been learned
regarding the history of mammalian life in the western hemisphere, it
is essential to give the reader some conception of the manner in which
that knowledge has been obtained. Without such an understanding of the
methods employed in the investigation the reader can only blindly accept
or as blindly reject what purports to be the logical inference from
well-established evidence. How is that evidence to be discovered? and how
may trustworthy conclusions be derived from it?

The first and most obvious step is to gather all possible information
concerning the mammals of the present day, their structure (comparative
anatomy), functions (physiology), and their geographical arrangement.
This latter domain, of the geographical distribution of mammals, is one
of peculiar significance. Not only do the animals of North America differ
radically from those of Central and South America, but within the limits
of each continent are more or less well-defined areas, the animals of
which differ in a subordinate degree from those of other areas. The study
of the modern world, however, would not of itself carry us very far
toward the goal of our inquiries, which is an _explanation_, not merely
a statement, of the facts. The present order of things is the outcome
of an illimitably long sequence of events and can be understood only in
proportion to our knowledge of the past. In other words, it is necessary
to treat the problems involved in our inquiry _historically_; to trace
the evolution of the different mammalian groups from their simpler
beginnings to the more complex and highly specialized modern forms; to
determine, so far as that may be done, the place of origin of each group
and to follow out their migrations from continent to continent.

While we shall deal chiefly, almost exclusively, with the mammals of the
New World, something must be said regarding those of other continents,
for, as will be shown in the sequel, both North and South America have,
at one time or another, been connected with various land-masses of the
eastern hemisphere. By means of those land-connections, there has been
an interchange of mammals between the different continents, and each
great land-area of the recent world contains a more or less heterogeneous
assemblage of forms of very diverse places of origin. Indeed, migration
from one region to another has played a most important part in bringing
about the present distribution of living things. From what has already
been learned as to the past life of the various continents and their
shifting connections with one another, it is now feasible to analyze the
mammalian faunas of most of them and to separate the indigenous from the
immigrant elements. Among the latter may be distinguished those forms
which are the much modified descendants of ancient migrants from those
which arrived at a much later date and have undergone but little change.
To take a few examples from North America, it may be said that the Bears,
Moose, Caribou and Bison are late migrants from the Old World; that the
Virginia and Black-tailed Deer and the Prong-horned Antelope are of
Old World origin, but their ancestors came in at a far earlier period
and the modern species are greatly changed from the ancestral migrants.
The Armadillo of Texas and the Canada Porcupine are almost the only
survivors, north of Mexico, of the great migration of South American
mammals which once invaded the northern continent. On the other hand,
the raccoons and several families of rodents are instances of indigenous
types which may be traced through a long American ancestry.

Fully to comprehend the march of mammalian development, it thus becomes
necessary to reconstruct, at least in outline, the geography of the
successive epochs through which the developmental changes have taken
place, the connections and separations of land-masses, the rise of
mountain ranges, river and lake systems and the like. Equally significant
factors in the problem are climatic changes, which have had a profound
and far-reaching effect upon the evolution and geographical spread of
animals and plants, and the changes in the vegetable world must not be
ignored, for, directly or indirectly, animals are dependent upon plants.
To one who has paid no attention to questions of this kind, it might well
seem an utterly hopeless task to reconstruct the long vanished past, and
he would naturally conclude that, at best, only fanciful speculations,
with no foundation of real knowledge, could be within our reach. Happily,
such is by no means the case. Geology offers the means of a successful
attack upon these problems and, although very much remains to be done,
much has already been accomplished in elucidating the history, especially
in its later periods, with which the story of the mammals is more
particularly concerned.

It is manifestly impossible to present here a treatise upon the science
of Geology, even in outline sketch. Considerations of space are
sufficient to forbid any such attempt. Certain things must be taken for
granted, the evidence for which may be found in any modern text-book of
Geology. For example, it is entirely feasible to establish the mode of
formation of almost any rock (aside from certain problematical rocks,
which do not enter into our discussion) and to determine whether it
was laid down in the sea, or on the land, or in some body of water not
directly connected with the sea, such as a lake or river. With the aid
of the microscope, it is easy to discriminate volcanic material from
the ordinary water-borne and wind-borne sediments and, in the case of
the rocks which have solidified from the molten state, to distinguish
those masses which have cooled upon the surface from those which have
solidified deep within the earth.

While the nature and mode of formation of the rocks may thus be
postulated, it will be needful to explain at some length the character of
the evidence from which the history of the earth may be deciphered. First
of all, must be made clear the method by which the events of the earth’s
history may be arranged in chronological order, for a history without
chronology is unintelligible. The events which are most significant for
our purpose are recorded in the rocks which are called _stratified,
bedded or sedimentary_, synonymous terms. Such rocks were made mostly
from the débris of older rocks, in the form of gravel, sand or mud, and
were laid down under water, or, less extensively, spread by the action of
the wind upon a land-surface. Important members of this group of rocks
are those formed, more or less completely, from the finer fragments given
out in volcanic eruptions, carried and sorted by the wind and finally
deposited, it may be at great distances from their point of origin,
upon a land-surface, or on the bottom of some body of water. Stratified
or bedded rocks, as their name implies, are divided into more or less
parallel layers or beds, which may be many feet or only a minute fraction
of an inch in thickness. Such a division means a pause in the process of
deposition or a change in the character of the material deposited over
a given area. Owing to the operation of gravity, the layers of sediment
are spread out in a horizontal attitude, which disregard the minor
irregularities of the bottom, just as a deep snow buries the objects
which lie upon the surface.

A moment’s consideration will show that, in any series of stratified
rocks which have not been greatly disturbed from their original
horizontal position, _the order of succession or superposition of the
beds must necessarily be the chronological order of their formation_.
(Fig. 1.) Obviously, the lowest beds must have been deposited first and
therefore are the oldest of the series, while those at the top must
be the newest or youngest and the beds intermediate in position are
intermediate in age. This inference depends upon the simple principle
that each bed must have been laid down before the next succeeding
one can have been deposited upon it. While this is so clear as to be
almost self-evident, it is plain that such a mode of determining the
chronological order of the rocks of the earth’s crust can be of only
local applicability and so far as the beds may be traced in unbroken
continuity. It is of no direct assistance in correlating the events in
the history of one continent with those of another and it fails even in
comparing the distinctly separated parts of the same continent. Some
method of universal applicability must be devised before the histories of
scattered regions can be combined to form a history of the earth. Such a
universal method is to be found in the _succession of the forms of life_,
so far as that is recorded in the shape of _fossils_, or the recognizable
remains of animal and vegetable organisms preserved in the rocks.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.—Diagram section of a series of beds, illustrating
superposition. A is the oldest, B, C, D, etc., succeeding in ascending
order.]

This principle was first enunciated by William Smith, an English
engineer, near the close of the eighteenth century, who thus laid the
foundations of Historical Geology. In the diagram, Fig. 2, is reproduced
Smith’s section across England from Wales to near London, which shows
the successive strata or beds, very much tilted from their original
horizontal position by the upheaval of the sea-bed upon which they
were laid down. The section pictures the side of an imaginary gigantic
trench cut across the island and was constructed by a simple geometrical
method from the surface exposures of the beds, such as mining engineers
continually employ to map the underground extension of economically
important rocks, and shows how an enormous thickness of strata may be
studied from the surface. The older beds are exposed at the western end
of the section in Wales and, passing eastward, successively later and
later beds are encountered, the newest appearing at the eastern end. Very
many of the strata are richly fossiliferous, and thus a long succession
of fossils was obtained in the _order of their appearance_, and this
order has been found to hold good, not only in England, but throughout
the world. The order of succession of the fossils was thus in the first
instance actually ascertained from the succession of the strata in which
they are found and has been verified in innumerable sections in many
lands and is thus a matter of observed and verifiable fact, not merely
a postulate or working hypothesis. Once ascertained, however, the order
of succession of living things upon the earth may be then employed as an
independent and indispensable means of geologically dating the rocks in
which they occur.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.—William Smith’s section across the south of
England. The vertical scale is exaggerated, which makes the inclination
of the beds appear too steep.

N. B. The original drawing is in colors, which are not indicated by the
dotted strata.]

This is the _palæontological method_, which finds analogies in many
other branches of learned inquiry. The student of manuscripts discovers
that there is a development, or regular series of successive changes,
in handwriting, and from the handwriting alone can make a very close
approximation to the date of a manuscript. The order in which those
changes came about was ascertained from the comparative study of
manuscripts, the date of which could be ascertained from other evidence,
but, when once established, the changes in handwriting are used to fix
the period of undated manuscripts. Just so, the succession of fossils,
when learned from a series of superposed beds, may then be employed to
fix the geological date of strata in another region. Similarly, the
archæologist has observed that there is an evolution or development in
every sort of the work of men’s hands and therefore makes use of coins,
inscriptions, objects of art, building materials and methods, etc., to
date ancient structures. In the German town of Trier (or Trèves) on the
Moselle, the cathedral has as a nucleus a Roman structure, the date and
purpose of which had long been matters of dispute, though the general
belief was that the building had been erected under Constantine the
Great. In the course of some repairs made not very long ago, it became
necessary to cut deep into the Roman brickwork, and there, embedded
in the undisturbed mortar, was a coin of the emperor Valentinian II,
evidently dropped from the pocket of some Roman bricklayer. That coin
fixed a date older than which the building cannot be, though it may be
slightly later, and it well illustrates the service rendered by fossils
in determining geological chronology.

Other methods of making out the chronology of the earth’s history have
been proposed from time to time and all of them have their value, though
none of them renders us independent of the use of fossils, which have the
pre-eminent advantage of not recurring or repeating themselves at widely
separated intervals of time, as all physical processes and changes do. An
organism, animal or plant, that has become extinct never returns and is
not reproduced in the evolutionary process.

Great and well founded as is our confidence in fossils as fixing the
geological date of the rocks in which they occur, it must not be
forgotten that the succession of the different kinds of fossils in
time was first determined from the superposition of the containing
strata. Hence, it is always a welcome confirmation of the chronological
inferences drawn from the study of fossils, when those inferences can
be unequivocally established by the succession of the beds themselves.
For example, in the Tertiary deposits of the West are two formations or
groups of strata, called respectively the Uinta and the White River,
which had never been known to occur in the same region and whose relative
age therefore could not be determined by the method of superposition.
Each of the formations, however, has yielded a large number of
well-preserved fossil mammals, and the comparative study of these mammals
made it clear that the Uinta must be older than the White River and that
no very great lapse of time, geologically speaking, occurred between the
end of the former and the beginning of the latter. Only two or three
years ago an expedition from the American Museum of Natural History
discovered a place in Wyoming where the White River beds lie directly
upon those of the Uinta, thus fully confirming the inference as to the
relative age of these two formations which had long ago been drawn from
the comparative study of their fossil mammals.

The palæontological method of determining the geological date of the
stratified rocks is thus an indispensable means of correlating the
scattered exposures of the strata in widely separated regions and in
different continents, it may be with thousands of miles of intervening
ocean. The general principle employed is that _close similarity of
fossils in the rocks of the regions compared points to an approximately
contemporaneous date of formation of those rocks_. This principle must
not, however, be applied in an off-hand or uncritical manner, or it will
lead to serious error. In the first place, the evolutionary process is a
very slow one and geological time is inconceivably long, so that deposits
which differ by some thousands of years may yet have the same or nearly
the same fossils. The method is not one of sufficient refinement to
detect such relatively small differences. To recur to the illustration
of the development in handwriting, the palæographer can hardly do more
than determine the decade in which a manuscript was written; no one would
expect him to fix upon the exact year, still less the month, from the
study of handwriting alone. As is the month in recorded human history, so
is the millennium in the long course of the earth’s development.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.—Bluff on Beaver Creek, Fremont Co., Wyoming. The
White River beds were deposited on the worn and weathered surface of
the Uinta, the heavy, broken line marking the separation between them.
The valley was carved out long after the deposition of the White River
strata.]

In the second place, there are great differences in the contemporary life
of separate regions and such geographical differences there have always
been, so far as we can trace back the history of animals and plants. A
new organism does not originate simultaneously all over the world but,
normally at least, in a single area and spreads from that centre until
it encounters insuperable obstacles. Such spreading is a slow process
and hence it is that new forms often appear in one region much earlier
than in others and in the very process of extending their range, the
advancing species may themselves be considerably modified and reach their
new and distant homes as different species from those which originated
the movement. Extinction, likewise, seldom occurs simultaneously over
the range of a group, but now here and now there in a way that to our
ignorance appears to be arbitrary and capricious. The process may go on
until extinction is total, or may merely result in a great restriction of
the range of a given group, or may break up that range into two or more
distinct areas.

Of such incomplete extinctions many instances might be given, but one
must suffice. The camel-tribe, strange as it may appear, originated in
North America and was long confined to that continent, while at the
present day it is represented only by the llamas of South America and
the true camels of Asia, having completely vanished from its early home.
These facts and a host of similar ones make plain how necessary it is to
take geographical considerations into account in all problems that deal
with the synchronizing of the rocks of separate areas and continents.

Properly to estimate the significance of a difference in the fossils
of two regions and to determine how far it is geographical, due to a
separation in space, or geological and caused by separation in time, is
often a very difficult matter and requires a vast amount of minute and
detailed study. Once more, the principle involved is illustrated by the
study of manuscripts. Down to the time when the printing press superseded
the copyist, each of the nations of Europe had its own traditions and
its more or less independent course of handwriting development. A great
monastery, in which the work of copying manuscripts went on century after
century, became an independent geographical centre with its particular
styles. Thus the palæographer, like the geologist, is confronted by
geographical problems as well as by those of change and development in
general.

In addition to the method of geologically dating the rocks by means of
the fossils which they contain, there are other ways which may give a
greater precision to the result. Climatic changes, when demonstrable,
are of this character, for they may speedily and simultaneously affect
vast areas of the earth’s surface or even the entire world. From time to
time in the past, glacial conditions have prevailed over immense regions,
several continents at once, it may be, as in one instance in which India,
South Africa, Australia, South America were involved. The characteristic
accumulations made by the glaciers in these widely separated regions
must be contemporaneous in a sense that can rarely be predicated of the
ordinary stratified rocks. Such climatic changes as the formation and
disappearance of the ice-fields give a sharper and more definite standard
of time comparisons than do the fossils alone, and yet the fossils are
in turn needed to show which of several possible glacial periods are
actually being compared.

Again, great movements of the earth’s crust, which involve vast and
widely separated regions and bring the sea in over great areas of land,
or raise great areas into land, which had been submerged, may also yield
more precise time-measurements, because occurring within shorter periods
than do notable changes in the system of living things. Such changes in
animals and plants may be compared to the almost imperceptible movement
of the hour-hand of a clock, while the recorded climatic revolutions
and crustal movements often supply the place of the minute-hand. It is
obvious, however, that if the hour-hand be wanting, the minute-hand
alone can be of very limited use. There have been a great many vast
submergences and emergences of land in the history of the earth, and only
the fossils can give us the assurance that we are comparing the same
movement in distant continents, and not two similar movements separated
by an enormous interval of time.

It may thus fairly be admitted that it is possible to arrange the rocks
which compose the accessible parts of the earth’s crust in chronological
order and to correlate in one system the rocks of the various continents.
The terms used for the more important divisions of geological time are,
in descending order of magnitude, era, period, epoch, age or stage, and
the general scheme of the eras and periods, which is in almost uniform
use throughout the world, is given in the table, which is arranged so as
to give the succession graphically, with the most ancient rocks at the
bottom and the latest at the top.

  Cenozoic era      { Quaternary period
                    { Tertiary period

                    { Cretaceous period
  Mesozoic era      { Jurassic period
                    { Triassic period

                    { Permian period
                    { Carboniferous period
  Palæozoic era     { Devonian period
                    { Silurian period
                    { Ordovician period
                    { Cambrian period

  Pre-Cambrian eras { Algonkian period
                    { Archæan period

It must not be supposed that all the divisions of similar rank, such as
the eras, for example, were of equal length, as measured by the thickness
of the rocks assigned to those divisions. On the contrary, they must
have been of very unequal length and are of very different divisibility.
The Pre-Cambrian eras, with only two periods, were probably far longer
than all subsequent time, and all that the major divisions imply is that
they represent changes in the system of life of approximately equivalent
importance. It is impossible to give any trustworthy estimate of the
actual lengths of these divisions in years, though many attempts to do so
have been made. All that can be confidently affirmed is that geological
time, like astronomical distances, is of inconceivable vastness and its
years can be counted only in hundreds of millions.

To discuss in any intelligible manner the history of mammals, it will be
necessary to go much farther than the above table in the subdivision of
that part of geological time in which mammalian evolution ran its course.
As mammals represent the highest stage of development yet attained in the
animal world, it is only the latter part of the earth’s history which
is concerned with them; the earlier and incomparably longer portion of
that history may be passed over. Mammals are first recorded in the later
Triassic, the first of the three periods which make up the Mesozoic era.
They have also been found, though very scantily, in the other Mesozoic
periods, the Jurassic and Cretaceous, but it was the Cenozoic era that
witnessed most of the amazing course of mammalian development and
diversification, and hence the relatively minute subdivisions necessary
for the understanding of this history deal only with the Cenozoic, the
latest of the great eras.

In the subjoined table the periods and epochs are those which are in
general use throughout the world, the ages and stages are those which
apply to the western interior of North America, each region, even of the
same continent, requiring a different classification. The South American
formations are given in a separate table, as it is desirable to avoid the
appearance of an exactitude in correlation which cannot yet be attained.

                           CENOZOIC ERA

  Quaternary period { Recent epoch
                    { Pleistocene epoch = Glacial and Interglacial stages.

                    { Pliocene epoch
                    { Miocene epoch
  Tertiary period   { Oligocene epoch
                    { Eocene epoch
                    { Paleocene epoch

Continuing the subdivision of the Tertiary period still farther, we have
the following arrangement:

                  TERTIARY PERIOD (North America)

              { Upper    Wanting
              { Middle   Blanco age
  _Pliocene_  {        { Thousand Creek age
              { Lower  { Snake Creek age
              {        { Republican River age

              { Upper    Loup Fork age
  _Miocene_   { Middle   Deep River age
              { Lower    Arikaree age

  _Oligocene_ { Upper    John Day age
              { Lower    White River age

              { Upper    Uinta age
  _Eocene_    { Middle   Bridger age
              { Lower  { Wind River age
                       { Wasatch age

  _Paleocene_ { Upper    Torrejon age } Fort Union
              { Lower    Puerco age   }

This is a representative series of the widespread and manifold non-marine
Tertiary deposits of the Great Plains, but a much more extensive and
subdivided scheme would be needed to show with any degree of fullness
the wonderfully complete record of that portion of the continent during
the Tertiary period. A much more elaborate table will be found in
Professor Osborn’s “Age of Mammals,” p. 41. There are some differences
of practice among geologists as to this scheme of classification, though
the differences are not those of principle. No question arises concerning
the reality of the divisions, or their order of succession in time, but
merely as to the rank or relative importance which should be attributed
to some of them, and that is a very minor consideration.

Much greater difficulty and, consequently, much more radical differences
of interpretation arise when the attempt is made to correlate or
synchronize the smaller subdivisions, as found in the various continents,
with one another, because of the geographical differences in contemporary
life. Between Europe and North America there has always been a certain
proportion of mammalian forms in common, a proportion that was at
one time greater, at another less, and this community renders the
correlation of the larger divisions of the Tertiary in the two continents
comparatively easy, and even in the minor subdivisions very satisfactory
progress has been made, so that it is possible to trace in some detail
the migrations of mammals from the eastern to the western hemisphere and
_vice versa_. Such intermigrations were made possible by the land-bridges
connecting America with Europe across the Atlantic, perhaps on the line
of Greenland and Iceland, and with Asia where now is Bering Strait.
These connections were repeatedly made and repeatedly broken during the
Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras down to the latest epoch, the Pleistocene.
By comparing the fossil mammals of Europe with those of North America
for any particular division of geological time, it is practicable to
determine whether the way of intermigration was open or closed, because
separation always led to greater differences between the faunas of the
two continents through divergent evolution.

Correlation with South America is exceedingly difficult and it is in
dealing with this problem that the widest differences of opinion have
arisen among geologists. Through nearly all the earlier half of the
Tertiary period the two Americas were separated and, because of this
separation, their land mammals were utterly different. Hence, the lack
of elements common to both continents puts great obstacles in the way of
establishing definite time-relations between their geological divisions.
Only the marine mammals, whales and dolphins, were so far alike as to
offer some satisfactory basis of comparison. When, in the later Tertiary,
a land-connection was established between the two continents, migrations
of mammals from each to the other began, and thenceforward there were
always certain elements common to both, as there are to-day. In spite
of the continuous land between them, the present faunas of North and
South America are very strikingly different, South America being, with
the exception of Australia, zoölogically the most peculiar region of the
earth.

In the following table of the South American Cenozoic, the assignment of
the ages to their epochs is largely tentative, especially as regards the
more ancient divisions, and represents the views generally held by the
geologists of Europe and the United States; those of South America, on
the contrary, give an earlier date to the ages and stages and refer the
older ones to the Cretaceous instead of the Tertiary.

                       CENOZOIC ERA (South America)

  Quaternary period { Recent epoch
                    { Pleistocene epoch—Pampean Beds, Brazilian caverns

                    {                 { Monte Hermoso age
                    { Pliocene epoch  { Catamarca age
                    {                 { Paraná age
                    {
  Tertiary period   { Miocene epoch   { Santa Cruz age
                    {                 { Patagonian age
                    {
                    { Oligocene epoch { Deseado age (_Pyrotherium_ Beds)
                    {                 { Astraponotus Beds
                    {
                    { Eocene epoch    { Casa Mayor age (_Notostylops_ Beds)

The Pleistocene and Pliocene deposits are most widely distributed over
the Pampas of Argentina, but the former occur also in Ecuador, Brazil,
Chili, and Bolivia. The other formations cover extensive areas in
Patagonia, and some extend into Tierra del Fuego.

We have next to consider the methods by which past geographical
conditions may be ascertained, a task which, though beset with
difficulties, is very far from being a hopeless undertaking. As has
already been pointed out, it is perfectly possible for the geologist to
determine the circumstances of formation of the various kinds of rocks,
to distinguish terrestrial from aquatic accumulations and, among the
latter, to identify those which were laid down in the sea and those which
were formed in some other body of water. By platting on a map all the
marine rocks of a given geological date, an approximate estimate may be
formed as to the extension of the sea over the present land for that
particular epoch. It is obvious, however, that for those areas which
then were land and now are covered by the sea, no such direct evidence
can be obtained, and only indirect means of ascertaining the former
land-connections can be employed. It is in the treatment of this indirect
evidence that the greatest differences of opinion arise and, if two
maps of the same continent for the same epoch, by separate authors, be
compared, it will be seen that the greatest discrepancies between them
are concerning former land-connections and extensions.

The only kind of indirect evidence bearing upon ancient land-connections,
now broken by the sea, that need be considered here is that derived from
the study of animals and plants, both recent and fossil. All-important in
this connection is the principle that the same or closely similar species
do not arise independently in areas between which there is no connection.
It is not impossible that such an independent origin of organisms which
the naturalist would class as belonging to the same species may have
occasionally taken place, but, if so, it must be the rare exception to
the normal process. This principle leads necessarily to the conclusion
that the more recently and broadly two land-areas, now separated by the
sea, have been connected, the more nearly alike will be their animals
and plants. Such islands as Great Britain, Sumatra and Java must have
been connected with the adjacent mainland within a geologically recent
period, while the extreme zoölogical peculiarity of Australia can be
explained only on the assumption that its present isolation is of very
long standing. The principle applies to the case of fossils as well as to
that of modern animals, and has already been made use of, in a preceding
section, in dealing with the ancient land-connections of North America.
It was there shown that the connection of this continent with the Old
World and the interruptions of that connection are reflected and recorded
in the greater or less degree of likeness in the fossil mammals at any
particular epoch. Conversely, the very radical differences between the
fossil mammals of the two Americas imply a long-continued separation
of those two continents, and their junction in the latter half of the
Tertiary period is proved by the appearance of southern groups of mammals
in the northern continent, and of northern groups in South America.

Inasmuch as the connection between North and South America still
persists, the geology of the Isthmus of Panama should afford testimony
in confirmation of the inferences drawn from a study of the mammals. Of
course, the separating sea did not necessarily cross the site of the
present isthmus; it might have cut through some part of Central America,
but a glance at the map immediately suggests the isthmus as the place
of separation and subsequent connection. As a matter of fact, isthmian
geology is in complete accord with the evidence derived from the mammals.
Even near the summit of the hills which form the watershed between the
Atlantic and the Pacific and through which the great Culebra Cut passes,
are beds of marine Tertiary shells, showing that at that time the land
was completely submerged. This does not at all preclude the possibility
of other transverse seas at the same period; indeed, much of Central
America was probably under the sea also, but the geology of that region
is still too imperfectly known to permit positive statements.

When several different kinds of testimony, each independent of the other,
can be secured and all are found to be in harmony, the strength of the
conclusion is thereby greatly increased. Many distinct lines of evidence
support the inference that North and South America were completely
severed for a great part of the Tertiary period. This is indicated in the
clearest manner, not only by the geological structure of the Isthmus and
by the mammals, living and extinct, as already described, but also by the
fresh-water fishes, the land-shells, the reptiles and many other groups
of animals and plants.

The distribution of marine fossils may render the same sort of service
in elucidating the history of the sea as land-mammals do for the
continents, demonstrating the opening and closing of connections between
land-areas and between oceans. The sea, it is true, is one and undivided,
the continental masses being great islands in it, but, nevertheless,
the sea is divisible into zoölogical provinces, just as is the land.
Temperature, depth of water, character of the bottom, etc., are factors
that limit the range of marine organisms, as climate and physical
barriers circumscribe the spread of terrestrial animals. Professor Perrin
Smith has shown that in the Mesozoic era Bering Strait was repeatedly
opened and closed, and that each opening and closing was indicated by
